---
title: "Exploring Department vs. Institution Workplace Satisfaction Alignment Among STEM Professional Track Faculty at HSIs Using Machine Learning."
collection: publications
category: conferences
permalink: "https://peer.asee.org/exploring-department-vs-institution-workplace-satisfaction-alignment-among-stem-instructional-faculty-at-hsis-using-machine-learning"
date: 2025-07-25
venue: "American Society of Engineering Education"
citation: "Salgado, H., & Kendall, M. R., & Strong, A. C. (2025, June), Exploring Department vs. Institution Workplace Satisfaction Alignment Among STEM Instructional Faculty at HSIs using Machine Learning Paper presented at 2025 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition , Montreal, Quebec, Canada . 10.18260/1-2--56501"

---

This empirical research brief examines differences in satisfaction at the departmental and institutional levels among STEM instructional faculty at Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs). Faculty satisfaction is influenced by both departmental interactions—such as those with chairs, colleagues, and staff—and broader institutional resources, including salary, technological infrastructure, and access to appropriate classroom spaces. While both levels shape faculty experiences, limited research has addressed whether satisfaction in these two domains is aligned. To investigate this question, we analyzed survey responses from 834 STEM instructional faculty across 26 HSIs, using data from Harvard’s Collaborative on Academic Careers in Higher Education (COACHE). A Wilcoxon signed-rank test revealed a statistically significant difference in satisfaction between the department and institution (U = 12,697.5, p &lt; 0.001), with a moderate effect size (r = 0.266). Most faculty (n = 567) reported no difference in satisfaction, suggesting general organizational alignment. Among those who did report a difference, more faculty favored their department (n = 181) over their institution (n = 86). To better understand the drivers of satisfaction differences, faculty were categorized into three classes: No Difference, Department-Favored Satisfaction, and Institution-Favored Satisfaction. A machine learning model identified eight features most predictive of these classes. Five of these were tied to departmental dynamics, including collegiality and chair recognition, while the remaining three involved broader institutional support such as classroom space and technology resources. Notably, clear communication of priorities from at the department (i.e. chair) and institutional (i.e. president) also emerged as influential, suggesting that alignment may depend on consistent communication across organizational levels. As instructional faculty continue to play a central role in STEM education at HSIs, aligning satisfaction between departmental and institutional factors will be important for enhancing faculty well-being, improving retention, and advancing
