---
title: "Enhancing Leadership Capabilities of Engineering Instructional Faculty Through an ICVF-Based Reflection Activity"
collection: publications
category: conferences
permalink: "https://peer.asee.org/enhancing-leadership-capabilities-of-engineering-instructional-faculty-through-an-icvf-based-reflection-activity"
date: 2025-06-25
venue: "American Society of Engineering Education"
citation: "Kendall, M. R., & Tallman, B., & Salgado, H., & Henderson, G. (2025, June), Enhancing Leadership Capabilities of Engineering Instructional Faculty Through an ICVF-Based Reflection Activity Paper presented at 2025 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition , Montreal, Quebec, Canada . 10.18260/1-2--56415"
---

This practice paper describes a faculty leadership development activity that explores the six leadership roles of the Integrated Competing Values Framework (ICVF). This paper aims to explain the development and implementation of this leadership activity for engineering faculty, supporting the Design strategic priority of the Engineering Leadership Development (LEAD) Division.
Engineering Instructional Faculty - full-time, largely non-tenure-track educators - are a growing population in higher education. Not only do these educators spend more time in the classroom positively impacting students, they also play a critical role in leading educational change initiatives, such as adopting curricula that connect with students’ cultural identities to bolster their sense of belonging in engineering. Because of their current and future potential to impact students, there is increasing interest in supporting these faculty in their continued growth due to historically poor institutional support structures. Given the limited institutional support structures and the unique demands on faculty in these positions, there is a pressing need for professional development programming tailored to EIF’s. Leadership development in particular can offer the perspective, resources, and tools needed to empower these faculty to pursue their change goals. One such initiative is the [intervention, redacted for review], which comprises a kickoff workshop that leverages various individual- and group-based participative activities followed by 7 weeks of virtual group coaching to support EIF’s ongoing educational change efforts at their institutions. This practice paper focuses on the design and implementation of a leadership activity used during the [intervention, redacted for review]. In designing the activity, we leveraged the Integrated Competing Values Framework (ICVF) as a theoretical foundation for understanding the various ways leadership may be practiced by instructional faculty in engineering. Essential aspects of the ICVF, such as navigating various leadership roles and self-reflection, were considered during the activity’s design. In short, the activity leverages self-reflection by having participants gauge their leadership capabilities and consider which aspects they want to grow, acquire, or delegate to achieve their proposed change goal. Finally, the impact of this activity on participant leadership growth is explored through the analysis of qualitative data, i.e., observations of the activity and participant artifacts. The value and limitations of this activity as a leadership development tool are discussed (e.g., its developmental relevance to students and faculty), along with recommendations for practice.

